In this video, let us learn about the masters theorem
for decreasing functions
The masters theorem provides generalized ways to solve recurrence
relations. Using masters theorem we can instantly tell the
time complexity of any recurrence relation and let us see
how
Let us write the general form of recurrence relation of
decreasing function T(n) equal to aT(n-b) + f(n)
were a is greater than zero
and b is greater than zero
We have three cases here
First is one a is less than zero for example
T(n) equal to 0.5T(n-1) + 1
or T(n) equal to 0.75T(n-1) + n
And next case is when n equal to one
For example
T(n) equal to T(n-1) + 1
or T(n) equal to T(n-1) + n^2
And in the final cases when
a is greater than one
For example T(n) equal to 3T(n-1) + 1
or T(n) equal to
2T(n-2) + n
first when A is Less than zero
What does it mean It means there is no recursion
This case won't occur in algorithm analysis
If there is no recursion we don't need to
bother about the recursion part
So whatever the time present in the second part that
is f(n) is the total time complexity
So for this one O(1) is the
answer
And for this one O(1) is the answer
In general we can say that when a is less than
zero the total time complexitiy is f(n). Now let us
solve the next case when a equal to one
Then it's just T(n-1)
We already know that T(n-k) will
take n units of time
So for this one we just need to multiply n
with whatever time is present in the second part here
the second part is f(n) So for this one
n*1 that is O(n) is the answer
And for this one the time complexity is n*n^2
that is O(n^3)
So in general, we can say that when n equal to
one the total time complexity is n*f(n)
Similarly when n is greater than one we can say the
total time complexity is O(a raised to n/b * f(n))
For example let us take this recurrence relation
T(n) equal to 3T(n-1) + 1
here the value of a is 3 and the value of
b is i
And f(n) is equal to one
Let us calculate the time complexity with this formula a raised
to n/b into f(n) here substitute values of
a, b and f(n)
we will get 3 raised to n/1
into 1
That is O(3^n)
Similarly for this recurrence relation the value of a is 2
and the value of b is 2 and f(n)
equal to n
So total time complexity will be
2^(n/2) * n
That is O(n*2^(n/2))
and that it. This is the masters theorem
for recurrence relations of decreasing functions
The theorem is if the general form of recurrence elation
of decreasing function T(n) is a*T(n-b) + f(n)
then T(n) is
O(f(n)) when a is less than one and
T(n) is O(n*f(n)) when
a equal to one and T(n) equal to
O(a^(n/b)*f(n))
when value of a is greater than one
Thats it. This is the generalised and simplest way to
Solve a recurrence relation
Try practising more recurrence relation using masters theorem and
thats all for this video. In the next video we will
learn how to solve recurrence relation of dividing functions.